Now, what we could do is,
we could add these things,
these are lifetime annotations.
And what this says is basically,
I'm defining a new type parameter, but
it's actually, sorry.
Not a type parameter, a lifetime parameter
that is giving a name to that lifetime.
That highlighted section,
we can now give it a name, and
we can now refer to it in our code.
The name that I've chosen is 'a, because
I just love the word 'a, just kidding.
So the way that lifetime annotations
work is that they always begin with
an apostrophe.
And because apostrophe's
kind of a long word,
we usually say tick instead of apostrophe.
So the way that I would say
this out loud is tick-a.
Now, like type parameters,
where we saw previously with option,
we chose capital T.
Or with Rust, we chose capital O, sorry,
with result, we chose capital O or
capital E.
You can choose any name you want for this.
I could have said tick-a, I could have
said tick-b or tick-foo or tick-hamburger.
Anything you wanna choose, you're totally
free to name it whatever you want.
And once you've chosen that name, you
put it in these angle brackets in here.
And then from then on,
you can reference that same tick-a or
whatever else inside your type annotation.
Well, right now, I'm only referencing
it once, so I could write this,
this is legal Rust code to write.
But really,
the whole point of defining this thing is,
I wanna use it in multiple places,
in order to explicitly encode a dependency
like the one that we have bent this
Releases struct and this years argument.
So let's see, how can we make this
lifetime parameter named 'a more useful?
Well, one way I can do this is,
when I've got my eighties and nineties,
I can reuse this inside here to say,
you know what?
I want to explicitly annotate and
represent the fact that these things
have to have the same lifetime.
And we know we have the same lifetime,
because the lifetime refers to the time
between when an allocation happens and
when a deallocation happens,
of that same memory.
And all of these things,
because they're all slices,
they're all referencing the same memory,
the same heap memory.
And because of that, they all have
the same lifetime as that heap memory.
That's just kind of a rule of slices.
Whenever you slice some heap memory,
you have the same lifetime
as that heap memory.
Whatever goes out of scope and
gets deallocated,
then the reference is no longer valid.
Because if it were,
we would have a use-after-free.
So now I've made that relationship
between them explicit in the code.
This is saying,
all three of these have the same lifetime.
And I've happened to
name that lifetime 'a,
but I could have chosen a different name.
Okay, so now, here's a way that I
can take that one step further and
actually put it inside the struct.
Here I've chosen 'y, again,
could have chosen anything.
But I chose a different name to illustrate
the fact that you sort of choose it on
a case-by-case basis.
But now I've said something
different about this struct.
I've introduced a lifetime
parameter to this struct.
And I've said, inside this struct,
Releases now has a lifetime
parameter called 'y.
And inside that struct,
it has three fields, and
each of them have the same lifetime.
So I'm essentially saying that whenever
you make this release a struct,
I don't care what the lifetime is that
you're gonna put in for years, eighties,
and nineties.
You can give whatever lifetime
you want for those things, but
all three of them have to
have the same lifetime.
Which means that either, most likely,
they all need to be referencing the same
exact heap memory, or they all need to
be referencing heap memory allocations
which happen to be, that are going
to be deallocated at the same time.
They're going to live for
the same amount of time.
So putting that back together with our
previous example, with all the 'a's,
we can now incorporate this new
concept of Releases into this.
And we can do that like so.
So we can say jazz takes 'a
as its lifetime parameter.
Years now has a lifetime annotation of 'a,
and Releases also does too.
And now we've tied these
two together syntactically.
Now when I look at this, this is telling
me more information than before.
And it's saying, I'm taking this slice of
i64s, and I'm returning a Releases struct.
And those slices inside that Releases
struct all have the same lifetime
as this years slice does itself.
And that's sort of propagated
through here by use of 'a's.
And so basically, putting these
things together, I now have a way to
express inside code the actual
relationship between these lifetimes.
Okay, so let's zoom back out and
take a look our previous code,
where we had the potential use-after-free
if we didn't get a compiler error.
So here we have our all_years vec,
which is an i64, and
it's got the same years inside of it.
We're calling jazz, passing all_years.
And remember, now we've changed our
jazz function so that it's taking
an explicit lifetime here of 'a, and
our Releases also has a lifetime of 'a.
So now, the lifetime of all_years,
which is the highlighted part in here,
is going to be sort of threaded through
this function through the argument,
because the argument has to have
that same lifetime as all_years,
because that's what we're passing in.
And then it makes it all the way into
the return value, such that now,
when Releases comes back, we can see.
This thing has to have a lifetime of 'a,
and
that means that this thing can only
exist inside the highlighted part.
Outside the highlighted part,
it's outside of its lifetime,
and there's going to be a use-after-free.
And so now, when we do reference
something from Releases,
knowing that Releases has this
lifetime which has now already ended?
We can actually see much more
clearly that we are, in effect,
already referring to all_years after its
lifetime has ended by way of Releases.
Because Releases has this same highlighted
lifetime, as we can see by having tracked
it through all these different
steps of the function calls.
And yet we're still trying to use
it outside of the highlighted area,
after that lifetime which we've
named 'a in this function has ended.
And that's exactly why this
thing is a use-after-free, and
sort of the value of these lifetime
annotations is helping us see this.
So lifetime annotations are something that
you don't necessarily need to use in your
own code,
depending on the code that you're writing.
But in some cases, they are required.
One of the reasons that I use an example
that has a struct is that, actually,
[LAUGH], you do always have to put
a lifetime annotation in a struct,
if that struct is gonna
hold on to references.
So previously, when I had the example of
Releases without a 'y inside of there?
That actually would not have compiled.
Because whenever you have
references inside of a struct,
Rust will require that you put an explicit
lifetime annotation inside your
struct that corresponds to every single
reference that you have inside of there.
Now granted, you can have references
with different lifetimes if you want.
I could say, this one's 'y, and
this one's 'a, and this one's 'b, or
something like that.
And then I'd have to define 'y and
'b and 'c, or
whatever names you wanna choose for them.
But every reference inside of a struct has
to have an explicit lifetime annotation.
The compiler will tell you to add
them if you don't do them up-front.
So that code I have previously,
that didn't have this angle brackets with
the tick inside of it would not have
compiled, just because I didn't have that.
It's the same thing with enums, same rule.
If you wanna have an enum
with references inside of it,
you have to reflect those in the type,
and explicitly define their annotation.
The other case where this can come up is,
quote often,
you'll find this in documentation.
So this is one of the things that I think
it's important to include the concept of
an lifetimes in an introductory course.
Is when you're going out and
trying to write real Rust programs,
you're gonna see things like this in type
annotations of packages that you'll use,
or in the standard library, even.
So it's pretty common to see these
things sort of floating around.
And now can kind of hopefully
get a mental model for,
what's the problem that these are solving,
and how do I read this?
How do I read this 'a or this 'y, or
whatever the case may be
between these different things?